1)What to do after a failed MOT?
0:18
My vehicle has failed its MOT

If your vehicle fails its MOT, you can leave it at the test centre for essential repairs. As long as the repairs are done within 10 working days of the test, your vehicle can then be retested for free.

2)Can I drive home after a failed MOT?
0:22
The answer here is yes, provided that in failing the test, no problems have been listed as 'dangerous'. If you continue to drive with dangerous faults - even if there is some time left on your old MOT certificate - then you could be facing a £2,500 fine and three points on your driving licence.
3)How long do you have after a failed MOT?
0:22
After 21 days a full test fee will be needed. Re-tests must be completed within 60 days of the original test. If your vehicle fails an MOT test it is treated as not being roadworthy and it should not be on the road, regardless of whether you have time remaining on an existing MOT certificate.

4)What is the most common fail on a MOT?
0:20
The most common MOT fails and how to avoid them | RAC Drive
Nearly a fifth of all cars which fail their MOT are because of an issue with their lights. Often, this will be as simple as a blown bulb. Switch all your lights on and walk around your car to check they're in working order.Oct 3, 2022
4)What is a major MOT failure?
0:20
Defects which are failure items but are not seen as dangerous are known as major defects. Major MOT defects will cause an instant MOT fail, and you will not pass the test until these defects have been rectified. Major defects include a shock absorber or exhaust system with a substantial fluid leak.
5)Is there a grace period for failing an MOT?
0:25
Some motorists may be under the impression that there is a period of grace regarding renewing a lapsed MOT, but this is sadly not the case. The only exception to this is if you already have a booking for the vehicle to be tested and are driving it to the MOT test centre. An MOT must be renewed before it expires.
6)Can you drive with a failed MOT but not expired?
0:21
If your car has failed its MOT, you can still drive it, providing no 'dangerous' faults were highlighted during the test and your previous MOT certificate is still in date. To check your vehicle's MOT expiry date, enter its reg number into our free MOT check tool.
7)Can you get a second opinion on a failed MOT?
0:18
Can I Get A Second Opinion On A Failed MOT? There is nothing to stop you from going to another garage for a second opinion after a failure, but you will need to pay for the second test in full.
Can I drive my car for 10 days after MOT failure?
0:21
The answer is that you can still drive your vehicle if it fails the test and its existing MOT certificate is still valid (i.e. if your test was before the expiry date) as long as no 'dangerous' problem(s) were listed in the MOT.
7)What are the odds of a car failing its MOT?
0:19
MOT checklist and comprehensive guide | RAC Drive
MOT fails and defects. The initial fail rate for cars, vans and passenger vehicles with up to 12 seats in is around 37%, so there's a fair chance you will find yourself in a situation where your car fails its MOT.
8)What if my MOT ran out 3 months ago?
0:16
If your MOT expired as much as 3 months ago, then it is highly recommended that you take it to the nearest MOT testing centre as soon as possible.Jul 
9)Am I insured with a failed MOT?
0:19
Remember that your insurance may no longer cover you if you receive an MOT fail result, even if your certificate is still valid. Additionally, once your MOT certificate expires, then both your insurance and tax will also be invalid. Under no circumstances should you drive your vehicle.
10)How strict is an MOT?
0:21
Is the MoT test strict? While the MoT is a thorough inspection of the vehicle, it's generally a very fair test. And 'fails' are usually for dangerous, or potentially dangerous issues. Around 40% of cars fail at their first attempt with the vast majority failing for basic things such as wipers, bulbs, or tyres.
11)What is a minor fail on MOT?
0:12
A minor defect means there is a defect which is not severe enough to fail the test, but should be repaired soon.